---
layout: post
title: Universities Confronting the Legacy of Slavery
---

The President’s Commission on Slavery and the University here at the
University of Virginia is very excited to welcome scholars from our
National Advisory Board. They will be coming to Charlottesville this
Thursday and Friday for the [“Universities Confronting the Legacy of
Slavery” symposium](/symposium.html).

On Thursday, the proceedings will open with a reception and documentary
screening of “Unearthed and Understood: Slavery at the University of
Virginia” at the Jefferson School African American Heritage Center in
Charlottesville. The reception will be followed by a memorial service at
First Baptist Church on West Main Street in Charlottesville where
University of Virginia President Teresa Sullivan and Virginia State
Delegate Delores L. McQuinn will speak. That same evening, we will hold
a gravesite commemoration service at the African American Cemetery
on-Grounds. The cemetery plot is located just north of the University
Cemetery.

Friday’s events will be dedicated to examining the history of slavery
and the enslaved at the university and considering how we might proceed
with memorializing those lives and incorporating that history into the
present-day University. The day’s events will occur at the
Harrison-Small Special Collections Library Auditorium.

Attending scholars include James T. Campbell of Stanford University (the
former Chair of the Brown University Steering Committee on Slavery and
Justice), Scot A. French of the University of Central Florida (formerly
of UVA’s Carter G. Woodson Institute for African-American and African
Studies), Leslie M. Harris of Emory University (co-founder and of
Emory’s Transforming Community Project), Terry L. Meyers of The College
of William and Mary (Co-Director of the Lemon Project), Joshua D.
Rothman of the University of Alabama (Director of the Frances S.
Summersell Center for the Study of the South), and Craig Wilder of the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (author of *Ebony and Ivy: Race,
Slavery, and the Troubled History of America’s Universities*).

Alfred L. Brophy, Judge John J. Parker Distinguished Professor of Law at
the University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill, will deliver the keynote
address on “Proslavery Political Theory and Jurisprudence Before the
Civil War at the University.”

If you cannot make it to Charlottesville for the symposium or the event
is full, simply visit this website on Friday—we will provide a link to a
live stream of all events in the auditorium so that anyone, anywhere,
can watch. Remember, October 16 and 17 are just the beginning!

