---
layout: post
title: Academic Village Walkthrough
---

On July 1, 2014, President’s Commission on Slavery and the University
co-Chair Kirt von Daacke walked through some extant spaces in the
Academical Village where the documentary record has confirmed that
slaves lived and worked. Joining me on the trip were commission member
Maurie McInnis and architectural history professor Louis Nelson.  The
University’s Senior Historic Preservation Planner Brian Hogg led the
walk-through.

Our walk-through began at Hotel A. The Hotels in the Academical Village
were originally dining halls that included living space for the person
the Hotel had been contracted out to and space for that Hotelkeeper’s
staff (largely slaves). The basement of each Hotel included a kitchen
room with a large fireplace for cooking and also two additional rooms
that could have been used as living or storage space. Although modern
industrial utilities now run through many of the basement spaces in the
Academical Village, much of the original layout remains intact.

![Hotel A Basement](/i/hotel-a-basement-cooking-fireplace.jpg)

We also visited the basement of Pavilion X. Those spaces now serve as
offices, but the original layout is largely intact, both cooking and
heating fireplaces remain in place, and the framing for window bars
covering windows to a secure storage room are still visible.

![Pavilion X Fireplace](/i/pav-x-cooking-fireplace.jpg)

![Pavilion X Window](/i/pav-x-basement-secure-window.jpg)

Next, we headed to two basement rooms beneath the Lawn rooms immediately
to the south of Pavilion VI. The first room, now filled with all sorts
of pipes and wires, is a room that we know served as a slave living
space. The next room, also a basement room, now has a sand floor that is
infill over an old water cistern. Both rooms have clear evidence that
they were finished with plaster. There are quite a few other similar
basement rooms along garden side of the Lawn on both sides (though the
topography on the east side, with the ground falling away quickly,
better lends itself to walk-in access).

![Exterior of basement rooms](/i/exterior-of-basement-space.jpg)

![Basement interior](/i/basement-interior-just-south-of-Pav-VI.jpg)

![Water cistern](/i/cistern-basement-room-interior.jpg)

From those basement rooms, we headed to the Crackerbox (1830s), a two
story outbuilding behind the Pavilion X garden and immediately adjacent
to Levering Hall (Hotel F). Again, documentary evidence has confirmed
that this building had a first floor kitchen and a second floor slave
dwelling space. That represents a very common type of kitchen
outbuilding at the time. It appears that most Pavilions at some point
moved the kitchens out of Pavilion basements and into a separate
outbuilding. As John Michael Vlach has argued, “moving such an essential
homemaking function as cooking out of one’s house established a clearer
separation between those who served and those who were served” (Vlach,
*Back of the Big House*, 43).

![Crackerbox](/i/crackerbox.jpg)

![Crackerbox oven and fireplace](/i/crackerbox-fireplace-and-oven.jpg)

There are at least two other still-standing outbuildings in the
Academical Village that were built prior to 1865 that we know served as
slave living or work spaces (McGuffey Cottage adjacent to Pavilion IX
and The Mews behind Pavilion III). Garden spaces certainly contained
additional slave dormitories (archaeological excavation has confirmed
one such building in the Pavilion VI garden).

Pre-Civil War images of the Academical Village and the documentary
record make it very clear that there were many other
outbuildings—kitchens, smokehouses, stables, slave dormitories, and the
like—that dotted the university landscape. These buildings also
represented key features of the slave landscape at UVA.

[![View of the Academic Village,
1856](/i/academic-village.jpg)](http://search.lib.virginia.edu/catalog/uva-lib:2153908)

As the President’s Commission continues its efforts, we will continue to
wrestle with how best to acknowledge fully the University of Virginia’s
indebtedness to slavery and to the enslaved. The day-to-day construction
and then decades of maintaining of the university were unimaginable
without the labor of dozens and dozens of enslaved people. It was a
plantation landscape that contained many features of the urban
industrial slave complex. Appropriately acknowledging that past, those
lives, and their experiences will demand far more than a few historical
markers around Grounds.



